Update opspec reference documentation (#910)
opctl/opctl: website/docs/reference/opspec/index.md

sidebar_label: Overview
title: Opspec
---

Opspec (a portmanteau of operation specification) is a language designed to portably and fully define ops (operations).

An op is any directory containing a [valid opspec file with the name `op.yml`](op.yml/index). By default, the opctl cli will look for ops in the `.opspec/` directory in your current working directory, but ops can be defined in any directory.

An op directory may contain other files and directories. These files are considered "embedded" within the op and can be referenced during execution as executable code, as data, or for whatever purpose you have.

If the root of an op directory contains a `icon.svg` file (must be [SVG 1.1](https://www.w3.org/TR/SVG11) with a 1:1 aspect ratio), it will be used when displaying the op within a UI.

## Call graph

> As an op runs, opctl parses [`op.yml`](op.yml/index) files to create a dynamic call graph tracking the different running containers as the are started and exit. The call graph is defined declaritively using [call objects](op.yml/call/index), which include sequencing and conditional support.

Reviewer: Typo `as the are started`

## Data flow

> Opctl has first class support for data flow into, between, and out of ops and their containers. Opspecs receive data from [`inputs`](op.yml#inputs) and return data through [`outputs`](op.yml#outputs). Within an opspec, data is referenced with a named variable that contains a typed value.

Reviewer: Maybe consider `with a named variable that contains a typed value` => `via named variables containing typed values` (could also consider linking typed to the types section)

Author: Good rewording. Given this flows directly into the types section I won't add a link

- [socket](types/socket.md)
- [string](types/string.md)

### Scoping

> A variable is created when defined as an [`input`](op.yml#inputs) or [`output`](op.yml#inputs), bound implicitly to an `output` when making an [op call](op.yml/call/op), or declared with [loop variables](./op.yml/loop-variable). A variable name is in scope from creation through the lifetime of it's `op.yml` file. Variable scope does not extend into [op calls](./op.yml/call/op).

Reviewer: This reads ambiguously to me `Variable scope does not extend into [op calls](./op.yml/call/op)`. Is it the current op call, child op call?

Author: The link here exists to make unambiguous. Literally, `op` calls in the `op.yml`. I'll reword though

Variables can be referenced using the syntax `$(name)`.

#### Scoping example

> ```yml

Reviewer: You might consider adding headings so these examples can be linked and so it's clear where one starts and the next begins

Author: Line 43 is the heading - this is all one example

Reviewer: I personally can't follow it if that's the case; it all flows together and I lose track of what's happening.

> name: foobar

Reviewer: You might consider making some or all of these trainings as opposed to reference.

inputs:
  variable1:
    string: {}
  variable2:
    string:
      default: "hello world"
outputs:
  variable3:
    string:
      default: "goodbye!"
```

Two variables, `variable1` and `variable2` are created from inputs. The CLI will prompt the user to provide a value for `variable1`, since it doesn't have a default, and `variable2` will contain the string value `"hello world"` if the user didn't override the value with a command line argument.

One variable, `variable3` is created from the single output, which contains the string value `"goodbye!"`.

```yml
run:
  serial:
    - op:
        ref: ../other-op
        inputs:
          input1: $(variable1)
        outputs:
          output1: $(variable2)
          output2: $(variable4)
```

> The variable `variable1`'s value is passed into `../other-op` where it will be stored in the variable `input1`. `../other-op` will not have access to the `variable1` or `variable2` names. After the op call completes the variable `variable2` will contain the value from `output1` that was produced by `../other-op`. Additionally, the variable `variable3` will be implicitly created from the output binding and will have the value from `output2` stored in it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The variable `variable1`'s value is passed into `../other-op` where it will be stored in the variable `input1`. `../other-op` will not have access to the `variable1` name. After the op call completes the variable `variable2` will contain the value from `output1` that was produced by `../other-op`. Additionally, the variable `variable4` will be implicitly created from the output binding and will have the value from `output2` stored in it.
```

Reviewer 2: After reading this section I still don't think I have a grasp of when/which variables are implicitly bound.

Author: Me neither! After my initial pass at this, I discovered that variables can be implicitly bound in loop vars.

This is a start at an explanation and will give someone a reference point to ask questions about and make improvements. I think this is a good place case for a more in depth "training" page.

Reviewer: Anywhere that you would write `blah : $(blah)`, you can write `blah:`. That's when/which : ). The whole point behind implicit vars was literally to save you having to repeat yourself; that's it.
